[Music]
it's really really a privilege to
welcome Dr Sid M today
Sid thank you
thank you and congratulations uh I'm
honored and privileged to be a part of
this incredibly important day in your
lives the medical school at Johns
Hopkins occupies a special place in the
history of medicine as all of you know
but it also occupies a special place in
my heart and in my own
work um as was just pointed out in 2015
Ken Burns and I collaborated on a vast
documentary on the history and future of
cancer bringing together past successes
and failures present hope and hype and
the exhilarating future of this
centuries old shapeshifting
disease now we wanted to locate the
documentary at a hospital that combined
the Humane as well as the scientific
aspects of cancer medicine we wanted a
historic hospital that would capture our
long
struggle and we also wanted a place
where the newest ideas in biomedical
research and medicine was was being born
our first choice
naturally was John's Hopkins when we
approached the hospital to cite the
documentary here we came to the meeting
full of trepidation and anxiety we knew
of medical cultures that refuse to open
their doors to the public and that are
naturally inclined toward secrety
secrecy as doctors we are used to the
idea of round curtains perpetually drawn
not just around patients but around
ourselves around our own culture and our
request was extraordinary we wanted to
film the intimate lives of patients and
families the highs and lows of their
lives as they were being diagnosed with
a potentially lethal illness in real
time and in real
places that three-year-old girl who
comes to the emergency room with a
diagnosis of leukemia or the man who's
trying to navigate himself through a
consent form for therapy for
melanoma yet when Ken and
I approached this Hospital in University
we could not have been more surprised
the extraordinary openness the welcoming
that we witnessed was emblematic of a
culture of honesty and collaboration and
a culture willing to throw open the
curtains that shroud our clinics and
waiting rooms and patients doctors
nurses students researchers and
residents threw open their doors and
Minds
extraordinarily there's a particularly
harrowing moment in that film when a
bone marrow transplant in a
seven-year-old child fails and the child
dies in his mother AR mother's arms
one of the most senior pediatric
oncologists on this staff indeed one of
the most one of the world's experts on
pediatric transplantation talks on
camera openly to the The Knowing
uncertainties of the field and how the
decision made for that child may have
been a flawed decision in
retrospect I challenge any doctor or any
human being to watch that moment without
understanding what the practice of
medicine is like from the inside what
the inner life of an oncologist or any
doctor looks like
in another moment a breast surgeon
associated with your hospital Lori
Wilson is diagnosed with breast cancer
herself on screen and shaves her head
before chemotherapy as her family and
her four-year-old son
watches I challenge any doctor any human
being to watch that moment without
tears imagine if a medical or scientific
culture of such openness in humanity was
part of our everyday experience of
medicine we would be richer deeper
better human beings so thank you thank
you for doing this with us on the
opening night of that documentary
millions of Americans caught a glimpse
of the inner life and future of
medicine the only other competitor on TV
that night I'm told was a was a Justin
Bieber
show um thankfully there was no overlap
between the
viewers it's a true story
I want to talk to you about the future
your future but in order to do that I
want to begin in the
past with a very personal story of
illness in my family I lived most of my
childhood with the shadow of mental ill
illness overhanging my family my father
was the youngest of five brothers and in
1946 his Middle Brother Rajesh once the
nimblest the brightest the most
accomplished died in his 20s after
suffering suffering from a severe form
of bipolar disorder an illness that
manifest itself in bizarre mood swings
bouts of depression followed by upswings
of exhilaration and obsession with the
occult a few years later another brother
one of my uncles joou was diagnosed with
schizophrenia as many of you know these
are genetically related illnesses and so
jugu and my grandmother moved from
Kolkata to our house in Delhi to live
with us and then one of my father's
nephews Mo was also diagnosed with
schizophrenia and sent to a mental
institution
madness has been among the mukis for at
least 50 years and that idea changed my
own experience with illness and
vulnerability our life in Delhi with my
uncle joou and my grandmother settled or
tried to settle into a routine but that
routine was impossible because his mind
was actively crumbling tall and rail
thin with a slightly fural look in his
eyes and a shock of matted overgrown
hair he resembled a Bengali Jim
Morrison unlike Rajesh whose illness had
surfaced in his 20s jugu had been
troubled from childhood he was still
capable of extraordinary bursts of
tenderness when I mistakenly smashed a
beloved vase at home he hid me in his
bed clothes and informed my mother that
he had mounds of cash stashed away that
would buy a thousand vases in
replacement but even that episode was
symptomatic his love for me or even his
love for me involved extending the
fabric of his psychosis and
confabulation
my grandmother besieged yet again and
now with doubled ferocity assumed the
role of a public defender for jugu for
near a decade she she and my mother held
she and my father held a fragile truce
between them with jugu living under her
care eating meals in her room and
wearing clothes that she had stitched
for him at night when he was
particularly Restless consumed by fears
and fantasy she put him to bed like a
child with a hand on his forehead
a
memory it is 1981 or 82 I'm 11 or 12 my
father has returned from a business
trip two of our neighbors are waiting
for him and the air seems tense with
anxiety my father enters the living room
and the men talk to him for a few
minutes their voes voices rise and their
words sharpen and I can make out the
jagged Contours of most of the sentences
jugu has borrowed some money from
them not large sums but enough to bring
them to our house demanding repayment
you should learn to control him one of
the men
says my father listens silently but I
can feel the meniscus of Rage rising in
his throat coating it with bile he walks
to the sealed closet where we keep the
household cash and he brings it to the
men making it a point not to count the
notes he they should keep the
change by the time the men leave I know
there will be a bruising altercation at
home with the instinctual certainty that
animals that run hill before a tsunami
our cook has left the kitchen to summon
my
grandmother the tension between my
father and his brother has been building
for a while joo's Behavior at home has
been particularly disruptive in the last
few weeks and this episode seems to have
pushed my father Beyond some Edge a
fragile varnish of class and normaly has
been cracked publicly and so my father
walks into joo's room and Yanks him off
the bed joou wailes desol like a child
who's being punished for a transgression
that he doesn't understand and my father
is livid glowing with an anger and
dangerous and so he shoves jugu across
the room it's an inconceivable act of
violence for him he has never raised a
hand I watched the scene rise to its
ugly Crescenda from behind the living
room curtains as if watching a film in
slow motion and then just then my
grandmother emerges from her room
glowering like a She Wolf she's
screaming at my father doubling down on
his violence her eyes are light like CS
don't you dare touch him get get out she
hisses to Jugo who Retreats behind her I
have never seen her more
formidable her Bengali furls backwards
towards his village Origins and I can
only make out some words thick with
accent and idiom when I piece her
sentences together the poison is
remarkable if you hit him I will wash my
womb with water to clean your taint I
will wash my womb she says and my father
is also frothing with tears now he says
wash it clean it wash it
that memory scarred my childhood but
also became one of the most meaningful
memories that I carried with me as I
grew up in
medicine what does it mean to defend the
weak from the will of the strong what
does it mean to disown the strong child
to protect the weak child what is it
about us humans and perhaps uniquely
about us as humans that makes us want to
bolster our weak our most
vulnerable several thousand fet from us
on 600 Wolf Street there's a building
that you might not know about now an HIV
Clinic in 1957 in that building a young
Hopkins doctor named Victor mcusic
founded the Moore Clinic named after
Joseph mmore the Baltimore physician
who'd spent his life working on chronic
illnesses the clinic would focus on
hereditary
disorders muusik spent much of his
lifetime taking care of men and women
with Theory diseases Marfan syndrome
goer disease and dwarfism above among
them and at the end of those years muui
began to have an Insight that is so
pivotal to this talk
that I have separated from everything
else as he treated men and women with
diseases he began to slowly understand
that illness for the most part is
nothing more than a mismatch between a
person's being his goals and his
environment the statement sounds like a
bland truism but it confs an essential
and profound truth the definition of
disease rests on the specific
disabilities caused by an in congruity
between an individual's endowment or
form and his or her current endowment
between the circumstances of a person's
existence and his or her goals of
survival or
success the mismatch can be severe or
debilitating and in such cases the
disease becomes identical to the
disability for instance a child with the
Fier fiercest variant of autism who
spends his days rocking monotonously in
the corner or scratching his skin into
ulcers possesses an unfortunate genetic
endowment that is mismatched to any or
nearly any environment or any goals that
we can imagine at least for now but
another child with a different and rarer
variant of autism might be functional in
most situations and probably
hyperfunctional in some this illness
like many is situational it lies more
evidently in the in congruity between
his specific genotype and his specific
circumstances and even the nature of
this mismatch is mutable since the
environment is constantly subject to
change the definition of disease
therefore has to change as the
environment changes in the land of the
blind as the saying goes the oneeyed man
is King
but flood that land with a toxic
blinding light and the kingdom reverts
to the
blind mcusic's belief in this Paradigm
the focus on disability rather than
abnormaly was actualized in the
treatment of patients in his Clinic
patients with dwarfism for instance were
often treated by an interdisiplinary
team of genetic counselors neurologists
orthopedic surgeons nurses and
psychiatrist trained to focus on
specific disabilities of persons with
short
stature surgically interventions were
often reserved to correct specific
deformities as they Rose and the goal
was not to restore
normaly but Vitality function and
joy why am I telling you these two
stories because I think they're
interconnected my grandmother and muusik
were separated by continents and
generations but they were tied together
in the common belief that illness is
often not a state but a
relationship it is a realization that's
rapidly Vanishing from a world we have
to describe illnesses in terms of
standardized codes and constraining
language it's a relationship described
by an old word which is the word that I
want to concentrate on next the word
compassion it's a strange word it's an
annoying word sometimes suggesting
Holiness or
nobility but its atmology is instructive
compassion arose from come and pass
stepping together the stepping part is
easy it's the togetherness that matters
the word word also gives rise to the
word
Compass possibly because here too there
was an attempt to step together in the
same direction or to find the right
direction how do we retain compassion
for the ill when we cannot step together
with them in their
illness it would be insulting to my
uncle or my cousin or the many patients
profiled in my film or the books to
insist that I saw the world through
their shoes I could not and I cannot you
cannot you will not in fact most days my
uncle went without shoes
anyway we cannot hope to understand the
interior world of the young young woman
with metastatic breast cancer or the man
with cardiomyopathy or the boy with
severe
autismsocial
for instance comes from knowing a part
but the emphasis these days is less on
knowing and more on parting
how can we know apart but not set apart
in 1994 the writer Maggie kzw jenss
writing about her own bone marrow
transplant wrote about the experience of
illness like being thrown out of out of
an airplane with a parachute into a
foreign country you descend she wrote
you hit the ground but where is the
enemy what is the Enemy No Road no
Compass but no map either no
training is there something you should
know but don't it's a powerful series of
questions that should we should be
asking ourselves
especially the one that gives every
intern and Nightmare is there something
you know is there something you should
know but
don't my own answer returns us to the
distinction that she makes between the
map and the
compass maps are representations of
known territories compasses provide
directions toward solving goals in
medicine as you will learn as I have
learned and in science we rarely have
Maps we only have compasses we cannot
represent the known territory of future
illness nor is there a one-o-one
relationship between where you are and
where you will be there is no GPS and no
Uber nothing will whisk you except
yourself from one spot to another what
do we have then
compasses instruments precepts of reason
and emotional intelligence that tell us
how to solve problem problems not what
mapped out Solutions look like or might
be these are vectors not points they are
directions not
directives even our foundational oath
from hypocrates is the compass first Do
no
harm by the way what profession is
founded on the negative First Do no harm
it tells us how to go but not what to
do Victor mcusic and my grandmother had
no
Maps but they had moral
compasses to protect the weak from the
will of the strong that was the basis of
their compassion they did not look at
the weak with
sympathy only they try to step together
with the ill to try to achieve concrete
realistic and reasonable goals for their
success today is an extraordinary day
for all of you an intellectual baptism a
ritual also associated with washing and
cleansing you will leave one world and
step into a new world freshly scrubbed
so let me be the first to welcome you to
the world's most astonishing profession
a Prof that has no Maps but powerful
compasses it is the occupational hazard
of of graduation speeches that you have
to give some py advice to Young
graduates I use the word young with some
trepidation I was at a University party
yesterday and one of the students came
up to me I told him I was going to a
commencement and so he congratulated me
on finishing my
degree how was it for you he asked I was
too afraid to tell him that I was
actually the speaker and so I said
pretty hard actually I almost didn't
finish which is actually the truth
anyway here I here I go when you are
lost as I often was and you surely will
be use these tools to work your way out
the drawings of territory that are
presented to you are going to be wrong
anyway you'll prove them wrong or the
friend sitting next to you will the
facts the locations the names that you
learn today the maps are going to be
replaced by the facts and locations and
names that you learn tomorrow
history doesn't repeat itself in science
it
reverberates so let me give you four
founding principles that I've tried to
use myself to navigate this shifting
landscape number one try to identify the
source of pathology the weakness in your
patients and bolster it against the
buffets of the world two try to resolve
the gap between a human's
vulnerabilities and his or her desires
and goals three try to narrow the rift
between a person's physical and mental
state and the environment that we have
forced him or her to
inhabit and four don't forget the most
valuable instrument that you possess
your compass through all of this will be
the one that has been for generations of
doctors and that's
compassion if you lose that
device as generations of other doctors
have then try to recover it slowly don't
worry about the stethoscope or the fancy
Mr ey but hang on to your compass to
your compassion this is the one
instrument that you'll need more than
any other as you go
forward take a look around
you make a list of a mental list of all
the facts the maps that you've learned
in medical
school and now know this as I do
now virtually all of this will be
replaced modified challenged in the next
decade look back a thousand
years and all the maps have changed the
compass in contrast has essentially
remained the same thank you so much and
congratulations
a